---
title: This Year I Learned, 2016 edition
---

Plus other random thoughts and opinions.

## Open source

### Alpine Bench

(http://github.com/devth/alpine-bench)

### dec

(https://github.com/devth/dec)

### git2kube

### Yetibot

http://yetibot.com Yetibot 1.0.0 was released. The primary change was an
overhaul of the configuration system, favoring immutable config.

## Work

I joined a new org at eBay right before the start of 2016. I initially worked on
the data ingestion side, creating a service that talked to BigTable, but
eventually landed as the Infrastructure Lead, investigating, recommending, and
setting up all initial infrastructure. I also built out a multi-zone,
multi-region Continuous Delivery pipeline using Jenkins Pipeline.

At our second unconference, I presented the result of my infrastructure
research.

I added functionality to measure latency during CD. This was extracted into the
Alpine Bench project.

I defined the initial engineering practices for our team of 60 engineers, and
served as a reviewer and maintainer for ongoing changes to the doc.


## Infrastructure

###  Kubernetes

### GitLab

I started using GitLab to try out their CI product. Turns out it's great, and
super easy to get started on. The main downside of GitLab is it's terribly slow,
but you can always host your own on beefy harware since it's open source!

### OpenSSL - how to setup PKI for internal TLS

https://jamielinux.com/docs/openssl-certificate-authority/ 

I've long avoided what I perceived to be nightmareish complexity in TLS and SSL.
Turns out, like most things, it's not that bad if you can slow down and dive in
deep for a bit instead of trying to hack things together on the fly.

### Drone.io

Great, open source CI, and the rightful successor to Jenkins. Sidenote: stop
using Jenkins, it's terrible!

### Concourse.ci

Looks nice but what's the deal with BOSH? Do not want. We already have a
cluster tool that's quickly becoming industry standard, and it's backed by a
little company called Google.

### Docker

I attended DockerCon 16 and learned a ton about Docker internals.

- Networking
- Plugins

## ElasticSearch

### HashiCorp

HashiCor gets their own section, because they are just that awesome.

#### Consul

#### Vault

#### Terraform

## Clojure

### Onyx

This is a really excellent streaming framework, written in Clojure.  Learning it
enough to use only took about 2 days, and I had a production installation setup,
streaming Datomic to ElasticSearch in less tha a week.  Highly recommend!

### Schema

I had heard of it of course but hadn't started using it. Shortly after learning
it, clojure.spec was released so I learned that and migrated to it

### test.check

I released a tiny lib called [dec](https://github.com/devth/dec) and decided I
would use it as my archetypical example of what any project should strive for
(functional purity, 100% test coverage, fully linted, has continuous
integration).

### component

I've long been avoiding this lib because it felt heavy / non###idiomatic / like
the awful Java cruft I left behind when I switched to Clojure (and Scala), and
adding it to Yetibot would require a pretty big overhaul. However, the benefits
are amazing, and far outweigh any downsides.

### om.next

this one of the most frustrating things I've ever learned (and I've gone pretty
deep in category theory!).

Problems:

- The docs are sparse
- Everything is some percentage of not fully baked
- Hardly anyone uses it which means hardly anyone blogs about it which means
  you're on your own for figuring stuff out

The good parts:

- Epic-level magic
- Whoa

### Datomic

I've used Datomic for a few years in Yetibot, but never really took the time to
learn it.


## Scala

Category theory.

## Go

Though not a huge fan of the language, I started using Go in order to be more
well-versed, since it's the language that many great open source infrastructure
tools and systems are built in (Docker, Kubernetes, ...).

Things I love about Go:

- The compiler is crazy fast. I can compile and run a simple code file using `go
  run` in less than 400ms!
- The result is a single binary. This is amazing in combination with Docker,
  resulting in tiny, ultra-minimal images.

## Groovy

Yes. I had to learn Groovy to work on our Jenkins Pipeline scripts. If there
ever was a language that shouldn't exist, Groovy would be it!
