# TLS Koans

TLS is supposed to be scary, right? Relegated to neckbeards?

It's actually ultra-simple; just somewhat arcane. Let's practice the most common
tasks to remove the fear from you.

Goal: remove the fear of PKI from software engineers of all varieties. You
shouldn't have to be in Infosec or Site Reliability Engineering to know how to
work with certs. All you need is a basic understanding of the underlying
principles to effectively wield the commonly used tools. Today, with free
certificates via LetsEncrypt, there's almost no reason to use HTTP anymore.

Embrace TLS because:

1. Privacy
   - congress passed the bill that allows ISPs to sell your browsing data.
     Thwart them by encrypting everything.
1. Speed

## SANs

Subject Alternative Names provide a way to issue a cert for multiple domain
names and IP addresses (among other things that don't make much sense when doing
PKI for web apps).

## Steps involved in issuing a cert

## BYOCA

Oh crap, CA is hard. Why is it hard? The hardest part is just building the right
config. There's an [amazing
minibook](https://jamielinux.com/docs/openssl-certificate-authority/introduction.html)
you should follow.

## Private key

Generating a 2048-bit RSA is super simple. ProTip: don't print the key; instead
put it directly into clipboard and paste it into your password manager.

```bash
openssl genrsa 2048 | pbcopy
```

## Revoke certs

Multiple certs can't share a common name. If you need to re-issue a cert (e.g.
if it expired) then you'll need to revoke it. Example:

```bash
openssl ca -config ./pki/ca/intermediate/openssl-vault.conf \
  -revoke ./pki/ca/intermediate/newcerts/1000.pem
```

You'll need your passphrase for your intermediate cert to run this.

## Resources

- [The current state of certificate revocation (CRLs, OCSP and OCSP
  Stapling)](https://www.maikel.pro/blog/current-state-certificate-revocation-crls-ocsp/)
  Revocation can be confusing.
