# OSS Pulse

When you decide to use an open source project, you're typically making a bets on
it.

How to pick a winner and general observations about OSS communities.

How do you determine whether you should make a bet on an OSS project? When you
use open source, you're doing just that. Whether or not you acknowledge it
you're betting on a variety of factors:

- whether the project will be maintained over time
- whether the project is stable and will remain stable over time
- the current state is good enough to meet your needs
- the docs are good enough to understand how to use it
- a community exists around it with some level of activity

It's common to see OSS owners and contributors complaining on Twitter about how
users are demanding, impolite, etc, including something about how the author
doesn't owe anyone anything. This is somewhat disingenuous.

We appreciate you but don't pretend you're only at the giving end of the OSS
deal! Look at how much OSS you rely on yourself and move away from this
attitude. Some give back more than others. Some only consume. Some are paid to
work on OSS full time. Some don't know how to do OSS.

## Single owner

Single owner equates to single point of failure. Good open source stewardship
means recruiting other contributors to help shoulder the burden of directing the
course of a project. It means progress can be made when the original owner is on
vacation, looses interest, or looses the ability to contribute.

## Community

It's easy enough to list off an IRC channel and say "we have a community", but
if your channel is full of questions and no answers or meaningful discussion,
this is not a community. It's arguably worse than not having a channel at all.

## Spread too thin

Engineers often have a wide variety of interests in and outside of tech. We get
ideas. We get inspired. We start a project, ship something, then over time
curiosity and interest wanes. The excitement of newness wears off. Once this
happens a few times, the attention of a software engineer, no mater how
well-intentioned becomes too limited of a resource.

## Poison

A hostile or divisive community is poison. Instead of focusing on advancing
tech, the community is now embroiled in petty human issues.

## Barriers to contributing

I rely on way more open source than I could ever contribute back to. Learning
a project takes a significant amount of time. Users need to be selective where
they spend their time contributing fixes back.

If you use a system that you'll likely never contribute back to you are at the
mercy of the owners and contributors when you need a feature or bug fix. Of
course if it hurts bad enough you'll do whatever it takes to overcome the
barriers of contributing, but this does not scale.

## Betting on poor tech

Like it or not, most modern infrastructure is betting on Golang. Golang has some
nice properties, but as far as PLT goes it is not good. The most important
ramification of this is bugs. Some of the most popular, highest caliber projects
are bug ridden and continually have bugs re-introduced because of the inherent
complexity of these systems built with tools that require humans to do the
computer's job. The next significant is lower-than-necessary velocity. If you
can't reliably encode correctness in a system then it's up to the poor humans to
(attempt to) verify at every step. This makes development extraordinarily
inefficient.

## The end

There are a number of things to consider when picking open source tech. They can
be time consuming though, so how much time and effort you put into evaluating
should be a function of how hard it would be to change out the tech later on,
how important it is, and how it might impact others on your team.

